Hello and welcome to the Harvest Baptist Church sermon podcast.
We are honored that you would click on this and listen to God's word preached by one of our elders.
At the same time, we strongly affirm the biblical mandate for Christians to be faithfully active and in-person part of their local church.
This sermon cannot and will not replace what a local church can provide to the life of a Christian.
That being said,
We hope that this sermon challenges and encourages you in your faith, and that it builds upon the faithful ministry of your local church.
We hope that you enjoy.
God bless.
Exist Chapter 15.
We will continue.
in our trek through Exodus.
Man, I am sure glad to be back on Sunday meeting again.
That two weeks is painful.
Pastor Chris and I were talking last week and looking at the weather conditions and I went down at six o'clock to check the road and the driveway.
I slipped on my way down and I saw the ice was on the road last week and I said, okay, it looks like Sunday is only going to get colder tonight.
There's no way that will be unfrozen and dry tomorrow morning.
Well,
At 8 o'clock I looked out and that road was slap dry.
I don't know how it goes from ice to dry, but that drove me nuts, but we had already made the call and I was like, you know, I'd have been willing to go, but anyway, things happen.
Here we are, but we're back now.
From the heart, the mouth speaks.
There's our sermon title from Exodus 15.
We're going to start with reading of Psalm 47.
I'll read it for you.
It says, clap your hands.
All peoples shout to God with loud sounds of joy for the Lord.
The most high is to be feared.
A great King over all the earth.
He subdued people, peoples under us and nations under our feet.
He chose our heritage for us.
The pride of Jacob whom he loves.
God has gone up with a shout.
The Lord with the sound of a trumpet.
Sing praises to God.
Sing praises.
Sing praises to our King.
For God is the king of all the earth.
Sing praises with a psalm.
God reigns over the nations.
God sits on his holy throne.
The princes of the peoples gather as the people of the God of Abraham.
For the shields of the earth belong to God.
He is highly exalted.
Moving to Psalm 28 to continue.
Psalm 286 to nine says that blessed be the Lord for he has heard the voice of my pleas for mercy.
The Lord is my strength and my shield in him.
My heart trusts and I am helped.
My heart exalts and with my song, I give thanks to him.
The Lord is the strength of his people.
He is the saving refuge of his anointed.
Oh, savior people and bless your heritage, be their shepherd and carry them forever.
You see these songs as we read Psalms, as we've even done sermon series through Psalms.
Songs in Scripture express many things.
Among some of those things, Psalms express, the songs in Scripture express truths.
Psalm 47, 7 to 8, it expresses King, he's the King, God's the King of all the earth.
He reigns over the nations.
He sits on his holy throne.
Songs also comfort the soul and Psalm
28 seven as I read the Lord is my strength and my shield in him my heart Trust and I am helped my heart exalts and with my song I give thanks to him Songs also unite Psalm 47 one clap your hands all people shout to God with loud songs of joy clap your hands together They also express joy in Psalm 98 verse 4 make a joyful noise to the Lord all the earth
break forth into joyous song and sing praises.
Songs worship.
They teach theology.
They lament difficulty in Psalm 26 to be gracious to me, Oh Lord, for I am languishing.
Heal me, Oh Lord, for my bones are troubled.
And finally songs.
They praise victory.
Songs Praise Victory, and that's where we find ourselves here in our text of Exodus 15, is the song of Moses.
This song is coming straight out of, as a result of, as an overflow of the heart from their victory, their triumph out from the Red Sea, as Pastor Chris brought us through chapter 14, now a few weeks ago.
So this song from Exodus 15,
which, by the way, is the first song we see in Scripture.
There is another song that Moses wrote in Deuteronomy.
We won't reference it, but just know that it's there.
But this is the first song we see in Scripture.
And it is nothing but, simply but, the overflow of Israel's heart.
Of Moses and Israel's heart.
So your memory verse this week is Proverbs 27, 19.
As water reflects the face, so one's life reflects the heart.
one of my favorite verses, but we'll get into more of that in a little bit.
But last time, if we can get back the, get back the date from two weeks over two weeks ago, last time in the pilgrims journey from slavery to Sabbath, Pastor Chris brought us, brought us, or he mentioned that he noted that the pilgrims journey bears the power of God.
It bears the power of God.
So in all tribulation, all trial God's power is seen through his people, no matter what circumstance.
And what a power in chapter 14 was shown.
What a power was shown.
We see that now in chapter 15, this is the response, the pilgrim's response to the power of God.
So when confronted by the power of God, there's three options.
There's three responses that you can have.
One is fear, recognizing and praising God's kindness, his love, his holiness, his righteousness, his goodness.
being awestruck before him, and quite frankly, sometimes actually truly fearing him for who he is.
We are but creatures.
He is everything, the creator.
Number two, you can reject.
So you can fear the power of, or the response.
There's a response to the power of God.
Then you can reject.
This is this other response, and it's the refusal to acknowledge the work of God.
It gives the results over to something other than him.
We see this with Jesus and the Pharisees.
Did we not?
Did the Pharisees not knew who Jesus was, but they attributed his works to demons.
They looked over it.
They rejected it.
They wanted nothing to do with it.
We see the power of God being rejected.
And then finally there's a response of apathy, apathy.
This is recognizing the power of God, but it falls on deaf ears, a cold heart.
Acknowledges maybe the power is good, but it doesn't recognize God in the process.
Apathetic.
It'd be like what we see when Pastor Chris mentioned that some have said it's the Red Sea that was being crossed.
And it's like the apathy in the response to the power of God would be, well, it was just a marsh and some wind blew it and dried it up and the Israelites went across.
It's being kind of apathetic given the context of everything we see in the text.
It's being denying almost in that case.
But in our text here, we see in the song of Moses that fear was the response by Israel to the power of God.
And rightfully so.
So if you will, will you please stand as we read through chapter 15.
We'll be going down to chapter, uh, verse 21, but we're going to start in, uh, uh, chapter 14 verse 30.
Thus the Lord saved Israel that day from the hand of the Egyptians and Israel saw the Egyptians dead on the seashore.
Israel saw the great power that the Lord used against the Egyptians.
So the people feared the Lord and they believed in the Lord and in his servant Moses.
Then Moses and the people of Israel sang the song to the Lord saying, I will sing to the Lord for he has triumphed gloriously.
The horse and rider he has thrown into the sea.
The Lord is my strength in my song, and he has become my salvation.
This is my God and I will praise him.
My father's God and I will exalt him.
The Lord is a man of war.
The Lord is his name.
Pharaoh's chariots and his host, he cast into the sea and his chosen officers were sunk in the Red Sea.
The floods covered them.
They went down into the depths like a stone.
Your right hand, oh Lord, glorious and power.
Your right hand, oh Lord, shatters the enemy.
In the greatness of your majesty, you overthrow your adversaries.
You send out your fury.
It consumes them like stubble.
At the blast of your nostrils, the waters piled up.
The flood stood up in a heap.
The deeps congealed in the heart of the sea.
The enemy said, I will pursue.
I will overtake.
I will divide the spoil.
My desires shall have its fill of them.
I will draw my sword.
My hands shall destroy them.
You blew with your wind.
The sea covered them.
They sank like lead.
in the mighty waters.
Who is like you, O Lord, among the gods?
Who is like you, majestic in holiness, awesome in glorious deeds, doing wonders?
You stretched out your right hand.
The earth swallowed them.
You have led in your steadfast love the people whom you have redeemed.
Amen.
You have guided them by your strength to your holy abode.
The peoples have heard.
They tremble.
Pangs have seized the inhabitants of Philistia.
Now are the chiefs of Edom dismayed.
Trimbling seizes the leaders of Moab.
All the inhabitants of Canaan have melted away.
Terror and dread fall upon them because of the greatness of your arm.
They are still as stone till your people, O Lord, pass by, till the people pass by whom you have purchased.
You will bring them in and plant them on your mountain, the place, O Lord, which you have made for your abode, the sanctuary, O Lord, which your hands have established.
The Lord will reign forever and ever.
For when the horse is a pharaoh with his chariots and his horsemen went into the sea, the Lord brought back the waters of the sea upon them,
But the people of Israel walked down dry ground in the midst of the sea.
Then Miriam the prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took a tambourine in her hand, and all the women went out with her, or after her, with tambourines and dancing.
And Miriam sang to them, sing to the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously, the horse and rider he has thrown into the sea.
Lord, what else can we take from this text?
But your glorious power, your mighty deeds,
Your awesome works in saving a people and redeeming ones to yourself and providing for them everything they need, including finally taking them to your holy abode.
Lord, may we see the truth in this scripture here this morning and may you be honored for it in a world changed because of it.
And it's in your son's name.
I pray, amen.
You may see it.
So we see
At the end of 14, chapter 14, we see that Israel saw God's great power.
And we see very easily in chapter verse 31 that they feared the Lord.
From that fear of chapter 15, verse one, Moses and the people of Israel sang the song to the Lord saying, I will sing to the Lord for he is triumphed gloriously.
He says,
I, they said, I will sing to the Lord.
This is a collective whole saying I, just like Pastor Chris mentioned on Wednesday night, if you were there, he mentioned how it is a blessing and such a edification when we hear those around us singing.
It is a collective thing to praise the Lord together and a good thing to be doing that, to hear one another, singing songs for this is an encouragement.
And that's what we see here with in the song of Moses.
I will sing to the Lord for he has triumphed gloriously.
the collective individually rejoices.
And why?
For he is triumphed gloriously.
Why?
For who has he has?
Yes, they were the recipient of the good, but who is the one who has triumphed?
God has.
It is God who they recognize here.
It is God given the praise first and foremost because of the outcome, the results of what has happened.
God is fulfilling his promise to get glory over Egypt.
Which is what he told them in chapter 14 verse four.
What did he say?
He said, I and I will harden Pharaoh's heart and he will pursue them and I will get glory over Pharaoh and all his hosts and the Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord and they did so.
So God is exorcising his promise and exercising his will.
Even those and, um, yeah, and even those that,
that he overthrew, it says the horse and the rider, his rider he has thrown into the sea.
He is executing his judgment over Pharaoh by throwing his rider and throwing the officials over, but even the horse, even the one that is another bit of creation, lesser than obviously humans, but even the tools that are used by the Lord's adversaries are also worthy of judgment.
They're also thrown into the sea.
Verse two,
They continue in their song.
The Lord is my strength in my song and he has become my salvation.
This is my God and I will praise him.
My father's God and I will exalt him.
The triumph produces a praise and proclamation.
The triumph, what God has done and he has done it, has produced inside them, for them to shout out, the Lord is my strength and my song.
David said in first Chronicles 16 verse 11,
He says, to seek the Lord and His strength.
In Nehemiah chapter eight, verse 11, he says that the joy of the Lord is your strength.
Israel said, the Lord is my strength.
How joyful have you been lately?
How much time have you invested in your walk with the Lord?
Where do you place your heart's affections, your mind's ponderings, your life's will?
Can you and I look at our strength and find that it is based in God's power, based on trusting His providences in our circumstances, based on acknowledging and trusting that you and I, that we're called to who He says that we are, and that is a royal priest,
a beloved child and a called disciple and an ambassador for Christ.
Can you look at your strength and see that?
Do you believe in that?
How joyful have you been?
Can your heart resonate with Israel and say, the Lord is my strength in my song and He has become my salvation.
This is my God and I will praise Him.
When the Lord is our strength and salvation, praise
is the result.
A heart that truly recognizes that God is our strength and that God is our salvation.
Praise can't help but overflow the heart.
It fills the heart.
Why?
Because that's the one thing that the heart's eye is on.
It's the one thing that the heart cares about.
It's the one thing that the heart's focused on.
A heart that has not God's as its strength will not be at peace.
Do you find pieces seeming to be some distant thing in your life?
Do you see that peace is fleeting?
Is it possible that your heart is not finding God as its strength, resting in his promises, knowing what he has said?
And we can see this as being the case.
This is what Israel faced in chapter 14, 10 through 14.
So go over to 1410.
He says, when Pharaoh drew near, the people of Israel lifted up their eyes.
So Pharaoh is coming at them.
After, if you remember, he, they got it, said, no, turnaround, you go set between pie, Hyroth and the sea.
In other words, the last pastor, Chris said, he called it rock between rock and a hard place.
You go right there and, and wait.
So now they turn around, they look, and here comes Pharaoh.
They're singing.
They basically can see individual soldiers right upon them.
He says, and behold, the Egyptians were marching after them and they feared greatly.
This is verse 10.
And the people of Israel cried out to the Lord.
They said to Moses, is it because there are no graves in Egypt that you have taken us away to die in the wilderness?
What have you done to us and bringing us out of Egypt?
Is not this what we said to you in Egypt?
Leave us alone that we may serve the Egyptians?
For it would have been better for us to serve the Egyptians than to die in the wilderness.
And Moses said to the people, fear not, stand firm and see the salvation of the Lord, which he will work for you today for the Egyptians whom you see today.
You shall never see again.
The Lord will fight for you and you have only to be silent.
Is this not, is this not what, what, what, what the text says?
The Lord is my strength.
In other words, be silent.
You have nothing else to add.
You have nothing else to give.
You have no concerns, no worries.
The Lord is your strength.
They praised and exalted him here in the text because or in their song because they were silent.
They ended up watching the power of God and realized his strength.
He continues.
The song continues.
The Lord is a man of war.
The Lord is his name.
Quite frankly, the translation is probably better with the Lord is a warrior.
The Lord is a warrior.
In other words, he is active, an active participant against the physical enemy.
We see that God is being praised for his physical protection and being a warrior, which the next verse elaborates more in detail.
So in verse one through three, you kind of see who kind of an outline who God is.
The next verse is four to 12.
The song still points to who God is, but then also goes into what he's done and how he did it.
So we'll continue to see that.
And then finally, verse 13 through 18, we'll see why he did it.
So the song continues and proclaims God's triumph again and gives another set of praise starting in verse four.
It says,
Pharaoh's chariots and his host, he cast into the sea, and his chosen officers were sunk in the Red Sea.
The floods covered them.
They went down into the depths like a stone.
Your right hand, O Lord, glorious in power, your right hand, O Lord, shatters the enemy.
And at the blast of your nostrils, the waters piled up in verse eight, the flood stood up in a heat, the deeps congealed in the heart of the sea.
You see, Pharaoh's army was cast into the sea, his officials as well as
his chosen officers, his chariots, they were all cast into the sea.
So they perished in the waters of judgment here.
So one, one apologetical note on this just to kind of reiterate what Pastor Chris had brought up with the Red Sea portion.
So look at the, in the song, look how they praised the situation.
This is not just nothing but a little pool of water that was, that was before them because look at the, look at the verbiage.
It says,
The word sea is used.
The red sea.
They were cast into the sea and it's chosen officers in the red sea.
How about sunk?
Kind of hard to sink when there's no water.
Okay?
So sunk in the red sea.
How about floods?
You see floods there.
The floods covered them.
They went down into the depths like a stone.
You got to have a bit of water to create a flood, an amount of water.
And then the depths like a stone.
You're only going to sink in something that's substantial.
You're not gonna sink if there's just but a pool.
Can't say I've ever sunk in a kiddie pool.
So I have in Lake Lanier though.
So we see the apologetical note that Israel gives us that Moses, they give us in the song here of the Red Sea and that was actually a substantial body of water.
So next in verse eight, he says, or they said, they sing,
They proclaim, at the blast of your nostrils, the waters piled up, the flood stood up in a heap, the deeps congealed in the heart of the sea.
Then in chapter 14, verse 21, it says a strong East wind came in and is equated to the blast of God's nostrils here.
So the blast of his nostrils was the strong East wind from chapter 14.
So A, God used his creation.
He uses his creation for his purposes, but it doesn't just, it's not just a random wind here.
Get this.
So just the breath of God can push back the sea.
So no physical barrier was constructed.
No dam to hold the waters.
No sinkhole in the earth drilled to gather all the water.
Just the breath of God made the waters pile up.
And this strong east wind, there is a wind this time of year when they crossed.
It's called the Kasim or Kasim winds.
They're out of the south and southeast.
Okay, so this would have been a normal occurrence in the spring for their experience.
The Egyptians would have known it.
They all would have been dealt with it.
Why?
Because they're high winds and they're sand.
So they would have been prepared for it seasonally.
But as you can imagine, Israel is in between Paha Hyroth and the sea.
And Egypt's approaching from the west.
Well, guess what?
There is a eastern wind, a strong east wind coming to them.
Do you think there's any chance that the Egyptians felt this east wind?
blowing straight across from them, because they were close enough that Israel was very fearful, that East wind undoubtedly experienced Egypt.
Egypt, no doubt, do you think it rang a bell in their mind?
This is odd.
We're used winds from the South.
This is a strong one from the East.
Do you think it brought them back to the plagues?
Do you think it brought them back that we're chasing a people and now something abnormal is absolutely happening?
Yeah, for sure.
So, undoubtedly, God's already preparing the hearts of these Egyptians
for slaughter, for being dealt with.
He is already showing his power to them, reminding them of who they're approaching.
So he is already fulfilling what's going on.
But get this.
So congealed, it says in the text, the deeps congealed in the heart of the sea, congealed to this kafal, means to shrink or to thicken.
So the sea floor obviously would have been sand.
And then over years and years and years, if you know of a river bed or anything like that, or a lake bed, you get that sediment pile on top of sand.
So you get the dirt, the things that sink down.
The percolation rate through that bed of water would not have been very fast.
And B, because it happened at nighttime, did it not?
You remember from chapter 14, this happened overnight.
It didn't happen during the day.
The sun had no chance to hit this amount, this path that they went across.
So they went through the sea bottom on dry ground.
So kafa, it shrunk, it thickened, and that it happened overnight.
So only God could do this.
Only God
can be described as being the one who provided the deeps congealed into the middle of the sea, the heart of the sea, the place where it's most unlikely for water to evaporate very quickly.
This is absolutely amazing.
So you can see why Israel is singing the way they are because God's doing things that nobody can do, that we can't even explain.
So a God that can do this,
will also easily deal with those that strive against him.
See, verse seven, in the greatness of your majesty, you overthrow your adversaries.
You send out your fury.
It consumes them like stubble.
Verse nine says, the enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil.
My desires shall have its fill of them.
I shall draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them.
The enemy plots, but the Lord triumphs.
You blew with your wind.
The sea covered them.
They sank like lead in the mighty waters.
The enemies of God have a lot of purposes, have a lot of wills, but all it takes is a blast of an nostril.
All it takes is a thought from the Lord and the wind and the sea covers them and destroys them.
Any plot against our God will be thwarted.
The most powerful nation at that time couldn't deal even with the Lord's breath.
The sea covered them, they sank like lead.
So like verses one and two and six, going into verse 11 here, the song again praises God for who he is.
This time there's some rhetorical questions that are begged and praised really.
And the rhetorical answer, the resounding answer is none.
Who is like you, O Lord, among the gods?
Who is like you, majestic in holiness?
Awesome and glorious deeds, doing wonders.
You stretched out your right hand, the earth swallowed them.
So again, the rhetorical questions, there are no gods who are like him.
There's none that are majestic in holiness, awesome and glorious deeds, doing wonders.
Psalm 66, one through four.
If you want to turn there, you can, but I will read it.
It says, shout for joy to God all the earth.
Sing the glory of his name.
Give to him glorious praise.
Say to God, how awesome are your deeds.
So great is your power that your enemies come cringing to you.
All the earth worships you and sings praises to you.
They sing praises to your name.
So again, not only that, but the song comes from the overflow of the heart once again.
Israel's heart showed they couldn't help but question who God is.
And I don't know about you, but if you've ever had a heart that
Hopefully, at some point, your heart's been resounding, saying the same thing here as Israel, where you've recognized who God is, and you said, oh, Lord, who is like you?
Who are you?
In fact, the more I learn of you, the more I struggle to comprehend you.
The youngest child can understand God's laid it out in his scripture, who he is, but yet,
The greatest theologian is still chewing on it.
And I've heard it said, and I like to think this is true.
I believe it was James White that said this.
He said that even in heaven we still learn about God.
I don't think we think about that very much.
We think that once we're there before him, we know him in his entirety.
But I'm not so sure Dr. James White is wrong.
Being a creation, yes we're redeemed, yes we're glorified, yes we're seated with him.
But I think because of how majestic he is, how glorious he is, how awesome he is, which by the way, in Scripture, go look up the word awesome.
It is only, that word is only used of God, which I've heard of some people only use that word awesome when they're talking about God and not use it in any other fashion.
But anyway,
I can imagine we would still learn and know who God is and learn about him throughout the rest of eternity.
So chapter or verse 14 through 16 says, the peoples have heard.
They tremble.
Pangs have seized the inhabitants of Felicia.
Now are the chiefs of Edom dismayed.
Trembling seizes the leaders of Moab.
All the inhabitants of Canaan have melted away terror and dread fall upon them because of the greatness of your arm.
They are still a stone till your people, Oh Lord passed by to the people passed by whom you have purchased.
So not only the current enemies in verse nine are vanquished, so they're dealt with, they're overthrown, they're put into the sea.
But the result of God's work reached the neighbors.
The result of God's work reached those that were around the region.
God's power was seen beyond Egypt.
So not only did Egypt give him glory through God's dealing with them, but also that glory has reached beyond the nation, beyond the immediate.
It's affected others who have not but heard of him.
It was seen beyond Egypt in the Red Sea, verse 14 to 16.
This is also a part of God's triumphant plan that God was creating provision for his people to be safe in the wilderness until his purchased people passed by.
So not only God deals with our moment, he takes care of our current issues.
He takes care of the current threat, but that he also is preparing it and preparing us for the future.
So I want us to take away at least one point from this.
Israel goes here.
They go from fearing the enemy to Moses says, just be silent.
They watch the Lord work.
And then they end up on the backside of this with the song of praise because their hearts full because they see his promises.
They see it and acted.
So.
I want us to take away from this here that no matter what the enemy says, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil, no matter what type of provision it looks like it's been made against us by Satan himself, no matter what stands in the way that God is A, using that opportunity, A, causing that opportunity to be in our life for a purpose, for a sanctification process so that praise will come from our hearts
which is for our good because it allows us to trust in him, but then also to glorify him.
And then also the promise that he gives, where the surrounding people have heard, the surrounding people were already being dealt with by the Lord for Israel's purpose.
And that's why there'll be surrounding people as well in our lives when they see us go through
the same type of persecution, destruction, trial, whatever the case may be, whatever the difficulty may be, or even whatever the praise may be.
Cause I believe God can get just as much glory through you praising him for a good time and pointing it to him just as much as going through a bad time and pointing it to him.
Both of those are valid reasons to glorify the Lord and are praiseworthy.
So are people only gonna see us for when God does kind things in our life that we praise him?
Or will we praise him through the tough time as well?
We need to give people the full picture of the gospel and how that works out in our lives and how our faith is a real faith.
But you see all this song is pointing us and it pointed them, as they sung it,
They're the ones who experienced this, Israel.
But the song is all for a purpose.
This song is for a purpose to glorify the Lord, but God's purpose in the events of the song starts in verse 13.
So this is the why section, the why he did what he did.
Verse 13 says, You have led in Your steadfast love the people whom You have redeemed.
You have guided them by Your strength to Your holy abode.
It is the purchased people that sing this song.
It is the purchased ones who sing.
Those that are not redeemed, those that are not purchased, don't sing songs like this.
Nor do they want to.
This was brought on Wednesday night as well.
I think that I mentioned earlier, but Pastor Chris was talking on Wednesday night about how church services centered and it centered on the redeemed praising the Lord, ultimately for God.
That's why we meet together is to praise his name, but church is for the saints to do that.
It's not for the unregenerate.
A church service is not for unregenerate people is for the regenerate.
Will they be in our midst?
Absolutely.
Should it point them to greater truths about whether it be in song or the preaching of the word?
They should point them to great truths.
But as Pastor Chris mentioned too, and as we've said before, they should feel awkward.
What these people are doing is weird to me.
So here, Israel makes it clear,
You have led in your steadfast love, the people whom you have redeemed.
It is the purchased people who God has led in his steadfast love.
Those he redeemed, he leads in love.
Leading in love means doing all things good towards the relationship.
All things good towards the relationship.
No matter if the situations are easy, they're difficult, they're certain or obscure, plain or complex,
God leads those whom he purchased for their good in his glory.
Verse 13b, the second part of the verse says that he leads them by his strength to his holy abode, that is his holy habitation, that is heaven, namely himself.
That is his holy abode.
God brings those
who he called from before the foundation of the world through the life he calls them in to the final habitation, the final glory and the everlasting presence of himself.
That is the purpose that we see.
We can do nothing to create this situation.
We can't do anything to try to finish or hasten the situation.
We can't do anything to sustain it.
We do nothing of merit to earn this situation.
So just as
just as the pilgrims, just as Israel was helpless between Paha Hyroth and the sea, so are we between our birth date and our death date.
We are just as helpless in between a rock and a hard place without the power of the one who moved the cloud between Egypt and the enemy, without the power of the one who parted the waters of judgment, supplied a creation on
a dry ground upon which for them to pass and then to close back the waters of judgment.
Without that same God, there is no hope.
This he did to show Israel and us that there is none more righteous, none more holy, none more loving, none more defeating, none more triumphant, none more praiseworthy, none more powerful, no greater warrior, no greater savior.
You see that in verse 17.
He says, you will bring them in and plant them on your own mountain.
The place, O Lord, which you have made for your abode, the sanctuary, O Lord, which your hands have established, the Lord will reign forever and ever.
This brother and sisters is the song of Moses, this part here.
This is the overflow of Israel's heart.
This is what they understood from what they just went through and what is in their heart and now coming out, that the Lord will reign forever and ever.
Those he redeems, he loves and leads and brings them into himself.
This is the reason for his triumphant victory over Egypt and looking forward by extension of the cross.
This is the greatest triumphant victory for actually the cross
or this pales in comparison to the cross.
As we know, Israel praises God for a moment here in the song, but it ain't long until they go back to complaining and being just as fearful as they were before.
The sermon may entertain us for a moment, but then when we leave here and go back to our day to day, did it stick?
any sermon, any Sunday morning.
Do we just go back?
Go back to being apathetic as a response to the power of God, as a response to the word of God.
I hope not.
I pray not.
I pray our hearts are always softened by the scripture.
For that's what we're getting at here was the heart of Israel.
in a response to the power of God and who he is.
Moses ends the song and he says in verse 19 as a note almost as a last mention.
He says, for when the horses of Pharaoh with his chariots and his horsemen went into the sea, the Lord brought back the waters of the sea upon them.
But the people of Israel walked on dry ground in the midst of the sea.
Then Miriam, the prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took a tambourine in her hand, and all the women went out after her with tambourines and dancing.
And Miriam sang to them, sing to the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously, the horse and the rider he has thrown into the sea.
So we see here Miriam, first of all, is called a prophetess.
prophetess word meaning inspired, I'm inspired woman here.
And remember Miriam's been there since the beginning, since she's the one who was watching over Moses in the Nile, at least most likely it's believed that Miriam is that that one.
She's been there from the beginning.
She's seen the promises of the Lord.
She's being used by God because in Micah six verse four,
She is, it is, it is said there that, that she is part of the ones that led Israel out of Egypt.
So she's part of the mix here between Moses, Aaron, and Miriam.
And at this junction, Miriam, by all accounts, seemed to be, she seems to be the one, if not, I don't think it was the full by what I can understand, but I think she definitely did have input into the song.
So she is very heavily a part of the praise of Israel for God leading them out of Egypt.
And we can see at the very minimum here that we can see that she at least led the women to song and dance and in praise to the Lord's victory of bringing them out of Egypt because the women went out after her.
So they followed her out with tambourines and dancing.
And we see this, for example, with Saul and David when they returned from the defeat of the Philistines, that it was the women that were mentioned that went out in the song and praise and dancing and praised to the defeat, the conquering, which makes likely sense with the males being off away in war and the women coming out.
And what we know of Miriam, the only other thing, is she was rebuked for trying to speak against Moses and Aaron
I speak against Moses in numbers and she was given leprosy as a result.
But Matthew Henry said of this text, he said, but those are to be reckoned great blessings to a people who assist them and go before them in praising God.
So even in Israel's walk here, Miriam,
supplied them a blessing by leading them in praise and song to the Lord for what has happened.
And she was a blessing.
So what we're getting at here, one thing I want to point us to going back to our memory verse that we're all going to do this week as water reflects the face.
So one's life reflects the heart.
Again, we see
The heart here of Israel is spilling out with praise because of what God has done for them and supplied to them.
So the question is, I want to ask you what's coming out of your heart?
What's been coming out of your heart this past week?
What do you anticipate is going to come out of your heart this week?
Because again, as water reflects the face, as water shows us who we are, so our heart, what comes out of our heart is what's seen by others in our life.
Our life reflects that of what's inside the heart.
What life are you living?
Which is the heart's reflection?
Does our heart reflect that?
Is it of one of praise?
It is one obedience.
Is our heart's reflection, is it one of love?
Does our life show a world that your heart loves Jesus?
Does it show that your heart loves Jesus?
Or when the world sees you, it comes up next to you and says, hey buddy, it's been a while, let's hang out.
Is there another savior that your heart relies upon or entertains during the week?
Is it self?
Is it pride?
Is it lust?
Is it attention?
Is our heart angry?
Does our life have a lot of anger coming from it?
Does our life have a lot of complaining coming out of it?
Does our life show one that is worried?
You realize what you ponder, what you put your heart to, what you set your mind upon is going to be what you dwell on, what your input is going to affect your output.
That sounds very psychological in a sense, but the reality is true.
If the word of God goes in, the word of God comes out.
If good goes in, good will come out.
I can't tell you how many times I'll talk to someone and I'll hear about a struggle with sin.
I'll hear about a struggle with an issue that they have.
And the first question, if you know me, likely will be, how's your Bible reading in your prayer life?
And most of the time it doesn't check those two boxes.
And we wonder why we have no peace.
We wonder why the hope is struggling.
We wonder why we're worrisome.
We wonder why we're not growing in our faith.
Faith is an active growth process.
Sanctification doesn't just happen.
So let the water of your life reflect the realities of your heart to expose sin, create repentance and a clinging to Christ.
Okay.
Ask your spouse what your life looks like.
I'm sure they're going to be the ones who know you the best.
You see, in chapter 14, 31, Israel saw, feared, and believed.
They believed in the Lord and in his servant Moses.
There is a greater Moses of the scripture, Jesus.
The awesome and glorious deeds of the cross was seen by man, that Roman executioner,
feared at the sight and he believed in the servant, Jesus.
This is our call.
This is our call to where if we're a believer, look upon the cross, look to Jesus.
If we're not a believer and we're unregenerate, the call for you is to look upon the cross and fear, fear the fact that your sin
has you based and bound and an eternity in hell and recognize that without Christ, without the Lord Jesus, without seeing that cross and what he did and know who he is and what he did and what he supplied, there is no hope.
But your call is to believe, look, fear and believe.
Your call is to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ for salvation.
Ephesians I'm going to leave you with, just as the Apostle Paul encouraged the Ephesians, I want to encourage us.
His words in Ephesians 1 verse 18 through 21 verse, let's say 17, that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory may give you the spirit of wisdom and of revelation and the knowledge of him having the eyes of your hearts enlightened
that you may know what is the hope to you or to which he has called you, what are the riches of his glorious inheritance in the saints and what is the immeasurable greatness of his power towards us who believe, according to the working of his great might, that he worked in Christ when he raised him from the dead and seated him at his right hand in the heavenly places.
Far above all rule and authority and power and dominion and above every name that is named,
not only in this age, but also in the one to come.
Let's pray.
Lord, your power and might and glory and honor are worth our every second of existence.
It's worth the meditations of our heart.
May the meditations of our heart be pleasing to you.
Lord, help us to fear you.
Lord, help us to grow in you so that our life, our heart reflects a life that is one of Christ.
Lord, may the main thing that causes us to go that direction, though, is a love for you.
We're not going to be able to manufacture that, Lord.
We confess that to you.
We can't build that up in ourselves.
But Lord, may we love you.
And then a byproduct of that is the fruit of the spirit.
Joy in Christ, joy in life, joy in knowing you and praising you and looking forward to a hope and the hope that we have in you and in the eternal presence with you.
Lord, encourage our hearts this day to live an honoring life of obedience.
Encourage us this day to be in our scripture.
Encourage us this day to be in prayer.
And may we edify one another as your church body here.
Edify one another to grow up to be more in your image.
You're worthy of praise forever.
And may we begin that this moment.
In Jesus' name I pray, amen.
Thank you for listening to this sermon from Harvest Baptist Church.
For more information about the church, please visit our website HarvestBC.Church.
If you would like to contact us, please email us at contact.harvestbc.gmail.com or you can call us at 706-780-2211.
If you are looking for a church home or visiting the North Georgia area, we would love for you to join us on a Sunday morning.
at 9.30 in the fellowship hall for breakfast and Sunday school, and then at 11 a.m. for our Lord's Day worship service.
We hope that you have a great week.
God bless.